## Graph Analytics

Big Data is essential for organizations to enable them gain deeper insights quickly that lead to better decisions and strategic business applications. According to SaS article, it says that the importance of big data doesn’t revolve around how much data you have, but what you do with it. You can take data from any source and analyze it to uncover insights that enable cost and time reductions, new product development, optimized offerings and smart decision making (Big Data What it is and Why it Matters, n.d.).

Big Data can help leverage industries to gain a competitive advantage through effective data driven decision making. For example, the airline industry can determine root causes of failures, issues and defects in real-time as well as generating coupons, leveraging customer insights by mobile technology and much more. It is also helpful in the social media industry by applying influencer analysis on social media network communities. (Ferguson, 2016).


Various analysis can be derived through big data. One of such is graph analytics, which is a strong analysis that makes complex data more simplified. According to IBM, Graph analytics also known as network analysis, is an interesting new area for analytics workloads (Ferguson, 2016). It is essentially used to leverage graph structures in an effort to visualize the relationships that exist between the people or devices in a network (Big Data 03 ppt, 2018).


Graph Analytics can be used for numerous cases such as detecting financial crimes, spotting fraud, influencer analysis, performing quality of service for transportation networks, optimizing routes and much more. For example, on the U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics website, in the FAA Data section, one can filter search options to a specific airline, specific airport, airport arrival or departure, and hone in on a specific month and acquire raw data of airplane flight delays. It is then possible to assess the delays in flight connections by analyzing the pathways throughout various airport hubs.


Graph theory can be applied in various aspects of engineering, social, and biological sciences and are often used to show the relationships amongst discrete objects which are defined as nodes also known as vertices in mathematical context) and connected by lines or paths known as edges. Nodes can either be individuals or affinity groups such as Facebook groups.  Through this we are able to understand the topology of the network or the relationships that exists between variables. There are four main types of graph analysis that are commonly used which include path analysis, connectivity analysis, community analysis and centrality analysis. Path analysis can be used to optimize route delays on ride share apps by assessing the shortest distance between two nodes on a graph. Connectivity analysis shows the weakness in networks whereas centrality analysis shows the influential people that exist on a social network through ranking algorithms such as Instagram influencers. Our paper is based on data on community analysis, used to locate different interacting groups on a social media platform. (Ferguson, 2016).


Meet-Up is a social media platform that offers membership software to enable their users create events on a common platform. The relationship derived from this platform are the members who attend or create meetups and is ideal for graphical analysis. The data set retrieved was on Meet-up data in Nashville, TN. It lists the nodes or discrete entities as well as the connection between those entities through edges. There are two sets of data: graph data which shows the edges between nodes and meta data which shows a list of all the nodes themselves. They should also have corresponding id’s for all nodes used in the graph data. Since every node has a unique id, we wanted to be able to see the connectivity between different members of groups. We developed a graph using Gephi, an open source network analysis visualization tool, and only imported selected data (group edges and meta groups). Group edges gives data to enable construct a group to group graph (node to node), whereas meta groups contains information on each group such as name and category. The weight indicates the strength of a connection between two nodes thus two groups can be connected and have a weight of 1, if there is 1 common member for each group or 2 if there are 2 members found in both groups. In order to link the file for group edges, we had to create a source id and target id so it could be easily displayed graphically. Visualizing this data not only allowed us to see how many individuals belonged to different groups but also how many groups existed within Nashville, and how many have similar members. We also observed how several nodes are directly connected to each other and this highlights the stability and strength of the network system. Another important thing to note was the dysconnectivity amongst the nodes- not all nodes in the graph are connected to each other. 


Graph analytics is very powerful in uncovering valuable insights about data, optimize processes and improve financial opportunities. As a data analyst, the goal is to not only uncover correlations and patterns within data but to be able to make effective data-driven decisions from the insights. Graph analytics supports the ability to add new data sources and develop new relationships within the data in order to answer arising queries. 
